In this video I'd like to implement a class template for an Array class but this is going to be a little
bit more complicated than anything we've done before but I'm sure you'll be able to follow along if
you've been following along with the course.
I'm in the Section 20 workspace and I'm in the class template a rate project.
Now I've started this a little bit already and the idea here is we'd like to create an array class ok
not an array raw array and not a dynamic array just a class Array and eventually we want it to be of
any size and of any type that would be pretty cool.
And we want this to be a fixed size array.
And basically it would be a replacement for using a raw array.
C++ already has this for us and C plus plus 11 we have an array class in the standard template library.
And I'll talk about that in a couple of videos.
But let's see how we could implement the beginnings of this if we can really learn from it.
So we want to we want to have an array of something right.
In this case this just stick to integers and then later on what we'll do is we'll make this generic
you raise a fixed size and that fix sizes.
And and I've got this end right here.
None of this will compile yet but I just want to get this point across here.
The question is how do we get this end while the user knows how big the array needs to be let's say
it's 10 integers or 20 integers or 100 integers.
They could pass that in through a constructor argument right.
The problem with that is that the compiler needs to know what the value of N is right here in order
to create this array.
Now we're not doing something like using a pointer and creating a new array of integers like we did
before we're not doing that.
That's not what I want to do.
I want to create it on the stack so the compiler needs to know the value of that N and it can't know
that if we pass it in through a constructor argument because it could be a variable could be any value.
So one of the first things we want to do is figure out how to do this.
So I want to be able to create an array class and let me show you the way I want to do it.
I want to do something like this.
I want to be able to say Give me an array.
Let's say it's a r r.
Right now it's an array of integers by default.
You can see right here and I'll just do that.
Now that's not good enough because there's no size information.
But if I can do something like that that's pretty cool.
So I can pass in the size of the array as a template parameter.
Well how do we do that.
Everything we've seen so far has been type parameters right.
Well it's possible to have non type template parameters.
And let me show you how that works.
And basically what we're doing here is we just have a regular array class is going to constructor default
constructor is a constructor with a initial value.
So what we're doing here is just setting all the values of the array Tibet value a method called Phil
which will just change all those array elements to whatever value was passed in here.
Then I've got a couple of more methods and I'll talk about in a little bit.
So first thing first let's make this a re class a template class.
So what we can do is we can come up here and we could say template and now we've got our template parameters
here right now what do we do here.
We're not passing in a type will do that later when we make this a generic type.
But what we want here is the size of the array so we can supply and write here.
Now when I use the syntax that I use earlier I've got my end.
That's pretty cool.
So that's how we get the end the user provides the end at compile time the compiler can actually create
that array.
Now we've got a friend function here that just used to display the array.
And in this case here it needs to know what that end is.
So I was going to put an end right in here.
So he needs that template première.
Now as I come down here none of this code really needs to be changed.
There might be a couple of new things that you haven't seen before this one here I don't know if we
ever overloaded the subscript operator but we're doing it right here and it's the subscript operator
right.
The two square brackets so that we can use it as array indexing and all we're doing is returning a reference
so that we're able to change as well.
So now let's go down to the main and see how we can actually use this.
And here's a couple of examples now.
All right the rest of this in a little bit.
But take a look at how useful this array is.
Here I'm creating an array of five integers.
These are all integers right now right.
I haven't made a generic yet but here I have an array of five integers and I can display what the array
size it should display 5 and then it will display the the integers because I've overloaded the insertion
operator.
I can fill the array to zeros.
I can't fill it to tens and display again.
And this is where the overloaded subscript operator comes in.
So I can specifically set and remember what's going to happen here it's going to call Nom's dot operator
subscript operator and it's going to pass in zero in this case.
So that's what's being called.
And I'm just setting those values in this case.
If this is on the left side where using the L value if it's on the right side will be using the R-value.
That's it.
And here in this case here we're actually using an initializer where initialize in 100 integers.
All right so let's let me run this you can see the output and this is all we did and it's so powerful
we really needed it.
We did was pass in that integer n as a non type template parameter.
So you can see what's happening here I've got five integers and that array is called names.
And notice when I display it I get five pieces of garbage right here.
Right.
That's exactly what I would expect.
Now here I'm filling it to zero and then I'm displaying it again and I'm getting this output right here
all of a bunch of zeros.
Then I'm filling it to tens and you could see them display right here and then in this case I'm setting
some zero or two thousand and some three to 2000 and you can see right in this line when I display it
you can see it in some zeros here.
And number three is right here.
OK.
So let me scroll just a little bit down and this last example we're creating 100 integers member they're
all integers or creating 100 integers.
This right here is that template parameter and this right up there when we created the top one was the
template parameter.
And so in this case we're creating an array of 100 integers.
It's a fixed size array.
We're not doing any memory allocation it's happening on the stack which is pretty cool.
The compiler's handling the sizing and we're initializing all of those elements to one display I'm all
right here.
This 100 of them OK.
So that's it.
Now we've got a pretty powerful little array class here that allow us to create an array of any size
but only of integers.
So let's take this to the next step and make it totally generic which is really where we want to go.
So let me close this window down up here and a couple of things I'll scroll all the way to the top so
I can give you these little notes here.
Since C plus plus 11 the ACL has been around before C++ 11 but in C++ 11 we have stood array.
And this is an array with a lowercase a.
Here and I'll explain what that array is and a couple of videos for now when we go over some of these
container classes.
This is a template based array class.
The idea here is in modern C++ we really shouldn't be using arrays raw arrays we should be using stood
arrays instead vectors.
Now the vector is great.
Right but the vector can shrink and it can grow and it varies in size depending on what you need.
That's one of the great things about the vector.
You don't have to worry about that but sometimes you know exactly what you have you know that you have
10 integers you have 20 integers or five strings and the vector might be overkill and it could be a
little less efficient in a case like that.
You really want to use stood array.
It's much more efficient.
It's not going to shrink.
It's not going to grow.
It's exactly that fixed size and sometimes that's exactly what we need.
We've got 12 months in the year.
That's not going to grow right.
So it's a good example of using instead array.
Now let's make this template class generic.
So what do we have to do.
It's really all about this guy right here.
It's not about size size is always going to be an integer probably be even better if we made that a
size t type since it's going to be an unsigned but we'll just leave it in it for now.
Values is the one that's going to change.
It's not just going to be integers could be anything.
So that's where we want to replace our placeholder right are type named T.
So we'll do that right now.
So let's start right here in the template parameter right here and would say type name and Wookey is
t again we can use anything we want.
Now that's going to be what's going to be replaced by whatever type the user wants right.
So let's walk through this and make sure we get them all.
This is fine.
This guy is going to be a team because now we've got values is an array that and size of T types.
OK here we've got two template parameter so we need to split the comma and then this is just my friend
operator that allows you to display these things on an output stream easily.
So that should take care of that.
Now let's take a look down here.
We've got the initial value that we want to set the array elements to that can no longer be an int because
it could be anything.
So we want that to be a T here the same idea we want to fill the array with whatever T's are provided
to us remember the is just a pluggable type could be an int a double a character or something more complicated.
Get sizes OK it's going to return an integer.
But this guy right here overloaded subscript operator is not going to return an integer reference it's
going to return a reference to a T OK.
Now this won't compile any longer.
Let me compile it just so you can see what's going on.
We're going to get errors right here.
Why.
Because look at our template definition right here it's expecting 2 items.
It's expecting a type and it's expecting an integer.
But right now we're only providing the integer here.
So we need to provide the type so we could say int comma and then the 5.
And now we've got exactly what we did before.
Right.
So let's try that again.
Same here we've got a hundred but that's try integers and we'll modify this to a different type of just
a second.
That's it.
Now if I run this I've got a clean run it looks like I didn't do much but there's a lot going on here
because in this case the compiler is providing two template classes for me right.
One is using integers with five and one is using integers with 100.
So now what we can do is we can modify this.
Let's say we want to modify it so that we can hold stood strings and not just integers.
So we're going to create an array provide the type which is going to be stewed string and how many do
we want.
So we want ten of them.
That's it you can really see the power of templates here.
So now what do we do let's call this guy strings and let's give it an initial value we'll call that
constructor with the initial value and what we'll do is we'll just say stood string and we'll construct
a string let's just call it.
Frank makes it easy.
That's it.
And then I'm going to just copy and paste this right here and rename a few variables so that we know
now that the size of strings now Nom's.
That's my array right here that I just named is strings that get size and what we want to do is display.
That's it.
Let's run this bears.
There it is the size of strings is 10 and I've got 10 stood strings in there they're pretty cool right.
I mean I didn't really do much all I did was make this class generic.
That's awesome.
Now suppose I want to change that first string.
Right.
The zeroth index so I could simply say strings Sub-Zero equals and we'll create a stud string I can't
use a character pointer literal right here because the typing would be wrong.
So I'm going to create a string for let's say Larry.
And that is going to be put in for the 0 if item and then I just display them again and we should be
able to see that first item in that strings array should not be Larry's.
Let me run that real quick and there it is you see right there is Larry.
That's pretty corny.
All right last thing is let's fill this array with some X's let's say.
So all six strings dot fill.
And again I want to fill this with less than string and it's just say X and we'll display it one more
time.
Now we should see all x's when it displays and there they are right down here.
So that really finishes this video up and this little mini section about templates including function
templates and class templates you can see the power here right.
It's so so powerful.
Now obviously let me scroll up right here.
Obviously you would never do this right here.
We're just doing this to learn if you need an array use stood array.
It's part of the SPL everything's baked into it.
It supports algorithms and iterators and all kinds of good stuff that we'll talk about soon.
So again if you need a fixed size array and modern C++ use stood array.
So the next video will start talking about.
Containers iterators algorithms.
And then we'll look at each one of the containers.
In other words array vector lists sets and maps and everything and we'll go through some examples for
those.